O Lithuania, my native land,
you are like health--so valued when lost
beyond recovery; let these words now stand
restoring you, redeeming exile's cost.
Holy Virgin, defender of the Shrine
at Czestochowa, who illuminates
the Ostra Gate in Vilno, whose sign 
revealed as one of her protectorates
the walled Novogrodek--who saved me once
with her miraculous glow. My tearful mother
entrusted me (it was her only chance,
I was near death) so when there was no other
cure, she helped to open up my eyes,
and once my lids were raised, though weak, I made
a pilgrimage to offer thanks and praise.
This memory of resurrection has stayed
alive in me since childhood; it makes
me hope a homesick exile might return
to wooded hills, green meadows, and the lakes
spread round the River Nieman--that I'd be borne
back to that womb of gilded wheat and rye
turned silver, to the amber mustard row,
buckwheat snow, and clover, burning like a shy
girl's blush--to strips of turf, ribbons that show
boundaries with green. All this I see
so clearly, down to each blossoming pear tree.
A larchwood manor stood upon the banks
of a stream, dividing groves of birch, its stone
foundation propping up the solid ranks
of oak beams and whitewashed walls, which shone
in stark relief against the darker green
of poplars all around. A barn attested
to abundant stores of grain, unseen,
and more in fields waiting to be harvested.
Black earth, gridded from countless plows,
fallow land, flowerbed, and garden--
everything about the farmstead shows
its owner's lot is prosperous. Even
stranger would face, like guest, a welcome sight,
a gate, open by day, unlatched at night.
A young man raced his carriage through the yard,
halted his team by the porch and vaulted down.
His horses dragged the coach, and panting hard,
began to graze. The door was shut, the lawn
deserted--anxiously he rushed to greet
inhabitant and house alike, unlatched
the lock, dismayed he found no one to meet.